.TH VOIX 1 "June 2026" "Voix 4.7.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
voix \- a Privilege Policy Enforcement Runtime
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B voix
[\fIOPTIONS\fR]
[\fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR...]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Voix is a Privilege Policy Enforcement Runtime for Unix-like operating systems. It is architected as a policy-driven execution system that can functionally replace \fBsudo\fR or \fBdoas\fR. Voix uses Pluggable Authentication Modules (PAM) for authentication and a YAML-based configuration file for defining access rules.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-C, \-\-config \fIFILE\fR
Use the specified file as the configuration sanctuary (default: /etc/voix.conf).
.TP
.B \-c, \-\-check-config
Validate the configuration file and exit.
.TP
.B \-E, \-\-preserve-env
Preserve the user's environment variables.
.TP
.B \-i, \-\-login
Execute the command in a login shell environment.
.TP
.B \-l, \-\-list
List the commands that the current user is permitted to execute.
.TP
.B \-n
Non-interactive mode; fail if proof (authentication) is required.
.TP
.B \-s, \-\-shell
Execute the user's login shell (ascend to shell).
.TP
.B \-u \fIUSER\fR
Execute command as the specified target mask (default: root).
.TP
.B \-v, \-\-version
Show the version of this artifact.
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Show the help message.
.SH CONFIGURATION
The Voix configuration file, located at \fI/etc/voix.conf\fR, is a YAML file that defines rules for command execution.
.PP
See \fIdocs/CONFIG.md\fR for details on the YAML format.
.SH SECURITY MODEL
Voix applies a tiered hardening strategy based on the target user's privilege level.
.PP
.B Privileged targets
(root, package manager): retain full capabilities and unrestricted
syscall access. Environment is scrubbed and inherited file descriptors are closed,
but no resource limits, capability drops, or seccomp filters are applied. This
ensures legitimate root operations (package manager hooks, process management)
work without restriction.
.PP
.B Non-privileged targets:
all capabilities are dropped, resource limits are enforced (RLIMIT_NOFILE,
RLIMIT_NPROC, RLIMIT_CORE), PR_SET_NO_NEW_PRIVS is set, and a seccomp syscall
blacklist is applied (if enabled in configuration). This provides maximum
containment for commands running as unprivileged users.
.PP
.B All targets:
the environment is fully scrubbed (clearenv) and rebuilt from a safe whitelist,
inherited file descriptors (3+) are closed, and signal handlers are reset.
.SH AUTHENTICATION
Voix uses the Pluggable Authentication Modules (PAM) framework for authentication.
The service name is \fBvoix\fR, and its configuration can be found in \fI/etc/pam.d/voix\fR.
.SH EXAMPLES
Execute \fBwhoami\fR as root:
.IP
voix whoami
.PP
Execute \fBwhoami\fR as a specific user:
.IP
voix -u user whoami
.PP
Start an interactive shell ascension:
.IP
voix -s
.SH AUTHOR
Veridian-Zenith 2026 (Dae Euhwa - daedaevibin@ik.me)
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR sudo (8),
.BR doas (1),
.BR pam (8)
